Karen, you’ve always been known
for your warm, infectious smile.
Could you tell us what has helped you
to cope with a serious health challenge
and yet still maintain
such a positive attitude?
Surprisingly, I have never cried
because of having ALS.
I only break down out of frustration
when I can’t communicate.
When I was first diagnosed,
I figured it was time
to copy my study Bible notes
and other notes I had been saving
and put them in electronic format.
I wrote so small that no one could read them.
It took a year,
but reading the Bible and notes built me up.
All the prayers said for us certainly help
and the boxes of cards
with encouraging words and scriptures.
We have never been without flowers,
which cheer us up.
And we’ve been surrounded by love.
I think we all feel that way.
There’s no other organization
that would take care of us
the same way like Jehovah’s organization
and his people do.
But, Karen,
can you tell us a little bit
about this device
that you’re using to communicate?
How exactly does it work?
This computer is a lifesaver
because it enables me to talk.
You know how much I like to talk.
It is called an eye gaze
because I calibrate this to my eyes
and then stare at a keyboard on the screen
and I can type words.
It also suggests words,
like on your phone,
so I don’t have to type everything out.
I can save responses
that I want to use again.
You might wonder
how it can sound like me.
I didn’t save my voice in time,
so my sister recorded 50 sentences
that have all the sounds
needed for English.
Since we are twins,
we sound the same.
Wow, that’s amazing!
What a blessing
to be able to have even your sister
help you out with it as well!
So, Rainer,
how were you able to obtain this device?
Well, when you have ALS,
or Lou Gehrig’s, as it is also called,
then the state of New York
pays for all the equipment.
This device,
with the insurance and all the attachments,
goes for up to $18,000.
So it’s amazing
that the government does this for us!
Wow, what a blessing from Jehovah!
So, Karen, how has this helped you
to maintain a regular study of the Bible
and even helped you
with your participation at the meetings?
I can type comments for meetings
ahead of time,
and I can study on JW Library®
and access jw.org.
It is much slower,
but at least I can study and participate.
That’s wonderful.
Rainer, can you tell us
how the friends in the congregation react
when they hear Karen
comment at the meetings?
Ah, the congregation is very appreciative,
and they’re really encouraged by that,
because at just about every meeting
Karen has a comment.
And after she gives her comment,
they say, “Oh, we’re glad it was Karen
and not you, Rainer.”
So they’re very happy
to hear Karen and see her.
Very good.
So these last couple of questions
are for both of you.
Maybe we could start with you, Rainer.
How have you received strength and support,
particularly from your brothers and sisters,
during this trial?
And do you have any specific examples
that you could share with us?
Yes, the brothers here in the infirmary
are just outstanding.
And I think this would be the first time
I will get through an interview
without getting emotional.
Sorry about that.
They are so nice and so helpful.
They come in the morning at 8:30.
They ask if Karen is up already,
if she can get up.
And they get her up,
and they get her ready for breakfast.
And sometimes that goes till 11:00-11:30
before she can have breakfast.
So this is a lot of work,
and they do such a beautiful job.
Remarkable!
Yeah, absolutely.
I’m sure they appreciate
your expressions as well.
What about you, Karen?
How have you appreciated the support
from the brothers and sisters?
Besides what I mentioned,
when our congregation heard about me,
they wanted to learn how to make my cookies.
So they took my recipes
and created a gorgeous cookbook
and gave us copies to share.
Then they arranged baking classes via Zoom.
It means so much to me
that a part of me will continue.
It was a real witness
to our unbelieving relatives too.
Wow!
So here’s the cookbook.
I don’t know where the camera is, this way.
That’s beautiful.
Look at that, Cookies Amore.
And we didn’t even know about it.
The sister composed it,
and it has a beautiful display and examples.
It’s outstanding.
Wow!
Oh, that’s beautiful to see
—how everyone has rallied
around both of you to support you.
So the last question,
How have you seen
Jehovah’s hand in your lives
as you face this challenge?
Maybe we could start with you,
Rainer, please.
Yes, of course.
This is a very difficult situation,
because when you’re paralyzed, it’s bad.
But if you’re paralyzed
and you’re not able to speak,
that makes
for a very difficult situation, you know.
But the help of the brothers
has been outstanding.
The love—it’s remarkable.
Thank you for sharing.
What about you, Karen?
We appreciate now
why the infirmary is always mentioned
in the letters to the Bethel family.
The ones who take care of us
cannot be compared
to others in the same profession.
They work with heart.
It isn’t just a job to them,
but they work with love.
My aunt was on Zoom
when a PCA kissed me on the forehead
as she left.
My aunt said, with tears in her eyes,
“They love her.”